I want to show you how the command history works in a second, so I'm just going to enter a couple
of random commands in here. It's just adding a couple of host entries.
Don't worry too much about what this command does.
It's not important.
I'm just using this to illustrate the command history coming up in a second.
So, I'm adding IP host Server1 and IP host Server2.
Next, I'm going to change the name of my router. I'm going to give it a hostname, but I'm going to deliberately
make a mistake here.
So I type in 'Router1' and hit Enter, and you'll see it tells me, "Invalid input detected at the marker."
It's because I forgot to say 'hostname' at the start here, so let's correct that.
But rather than typing the whole thing in again, when you make a typo on a command, the quickest way
to correct it is to hit the up arrow, and then that will bring the previous command back again.
Now, what I could do is I can use the left arrow to move the cursor to the left.
But if it's a big, long command, a way that you can do this quicker is by hitting Ctrl+A,
and that will bring you to the start of the line.
So I hit the up arrow to get the previous command back, then Ctrl+A to move to the start of the line,
and I can now type in 'hostname' and a space, and that's the correct command
now.
So I hit Enter and notice that the prompt changes to reflect the hostname that I just entered there.
Next, I'm going to show you command history.
So I'm going to hit the up arrow a few times, and you'll see each time I hit the up arrow, it cycles back through
my previous commands.
That's why I entered those commands earlier. Notice that it only cycles back through commands at the same
level.
I'm in global configuration here, so it's cycling back through the commands I entered in global configuration
mode.
It doesn't show the commands that I entered at the enable prompt or in the user mode. Now, I'm just going to delete
this command to show you the next thing. While I'm in global configuration,
if I try to do a 'show' command, so let's do a 'show ip interface brief', and I hit Enter, and I get the "Invalid
input detected."
You know, I said earlier that where you'll most often see this is if you've put in a typo. The other
place where you'll often see it is if you're at the wrong command level. When you're a beginner,
this is the most frustrating thing about the IOS command line.
You'll make this mistake a lot, where you're going to be at the wrong level when you enter a command.
Our 'show' and our 'debug' commands are entered in privileged exec mode at the enable prompt.
If I try to put it in global configuration, it's going to give me an error message, but this could be
really annoying.
So, thankfully, there's a workaround for this when you want to enter a 'show' command because it's very
common to put 'show' commands in.
And what I can do is I'm going to enter the same command, but I'm going to put 'do' at the front.
So again, I'm going to use the command history here. Rather than typing the whole thing in,
I hit the up arrow to get the command back, then Ctrl+A to go back to the start of the line.
Then I type in 'do' and a space and hit Enter, and you'll see that the 'show' command is going to work now.
And when you enter 'do', that will work from any level unless you're actually in privileged exec mode.
At privileged exec mode,
you have to do the 'show' command without 'do'. At all the other levels, you put 'do' in front of the 'show', and then
it's going to work.
So far, we've seen the user exec mode, the privileged exec mode, also known as the enable prompt,
and global configuration.
There's other levels when you're configuring something specific on the router. Meaning, at global configuration,
this is where I would do my global configuration for things that affect the router as a whole.
If I wanted to configure a specific interface, I need to go to that level in the command hierarchy.
So looking at my output here, I can see the interfaces I've got available on this router. If I wanted to
configure interface FastEthernet0/0, for example, putting an IP address on there,
I have to go to interface configuration mode. So to get there,
the command is 'interface', and I'll use tab completion here.
So 'interface fastEthernet 0/0', and notice here that in the output above, FastEthernet, that was capitalized
at the start.
Here, I don't need to use capital letters.
IOS is not case sensitive. It doesn't matter if you use upper case or lower case, with one exception that
we'll talk about a little bit later in this lecture.
So I go to interface
FastEthernet 0/0,  hit Enter. You'll see that the command prompt changes again to show
config-if,
and I can see very clearly that I'm at the interface configuration level. If I want to drop back down to level,
I enter the 'exit' command, and that takes me back to global configuration.
If I wanted to go to the enable prompt again, I would enter 'exit' again, and that will drop me back to the
enable prompt to privileged exec mode.
Notice from here, I can't enter interface FastEthernet 0/0.
This is going to give me an error message because you have to go up through the levels one by one.
You can't skip straight from the enable prompt to the interface prompt.
So I'll go back through the levels, I enter 'config t' to get to global configuration, and then 'interface
fast0/0' to get to the interface mode.
So when you go up through the levels, you have to go one by one.
When you drop back down the levels, you can actually do that all in one go.
So, it was 'exit' to drop down one level. To drop all the way back to the enable prompt with one command,
I can enter 'end'.
Another way I could have done that would be by hitting Ctrl+C on the keyboard.
Okay, a couple of the most common commands you'll use when you're working on a Cisco router or switch is the
'show ip interface brief' that you saw earlier. That will show all the interfaces on the router, and the
state of the interface, whether it's up or not, and also the IP address configured on the interface as well,
if there's an IP address on there. The other 'show' command that is used really, really often is 'show running-config'.
That shows the entire configuration on the router,
and I'll hit the Spacebar here to scroll through the configuration.
You can see even on a new router, it's a really long configuration file, and it's going to take
quite a while to scroll all through there. On a production
router,
it's going to be even longer because there's going to be actual configuration in there.
There are switches we can use for the 'show run' command, which are going to help us target the actual part
of the configuration that we want to look at.
For example, if I want to look at the configuration for the particular interface, I can do 'show run
interface', and then the interface I'm interested in,
and it shows me just that part of the configuration.
So to see the interface configuration, it's 'show run interface', and the interface number. The other switches that
we can use on the 'show run' command use a pipe '|'.
To give you an example of that, I can do a 'show run',
and then the pipe '|' symbol, which looks like that, and then the available options after there,
the ones that are most commonly used,
begin is probably the most commonly used.
I can also include and exclude as well.
So, for example, I could do 'show run | begin hostname', and this will show me the running configuration, but starting
from where hostname shows up in the running configuration.
Now, you know, I said that there's an exception to when the IOS command line is case sensitive or not.
When you use a pipe '|', this is actually using a regular expression which is case sensitive.
So if I did a 'show run | begin', and try not to put a typo in, and then 'Hostname', with a capital H,
and hit Enter, you'll see it's going to just go straight back to the command line again.
This is not an error. The reason is that 'Hostname', with a capital H, is not in the running configuration at all,
so there's no output to show.
To give you examples for the other pipe options, I could do a 'show run', and then pipe '|' it to 'include
interface', and it will show me all the lines that include 'interface'. Meaning, the word 'interface' in the
actual output.
I can also do a 'show run | exclude interface'.
This will show me all lines from the configuration but do not include the word 'interface'.
And I can also do a 'show run | section interface'. That will show me the configuration for
all my different interfaces.
Now, when you've got a production router, you're not going to just have interfaces configured on there.
You'll have other things like routing protocols, for example.
So I could also do a 'show run | section', and put in the particular part of the configuration
I want to see here.
Now, if you put in a question mark '?', it's not very useful here because it just tells you 'LINE', telling
you to use a regular expression.
For example, I could put in 'section bgp' to see information about the BGP routing protocol. I haven't
configured that on this router yet,
so I'm not going to get any output. But if I was using BGP on this router, and I had a big, long configuration
on there, this would be a useful command because it would just take me straight to the BGP configuration, and
I could see that very clearly.
Okay, so that's how to navigate the IOS command line.
In the next lecture, we'll take a look at how to manage our configuration files.